# Codefundopp Project : Causes, Prediction And Prevention of Floods 
Considering the monsoon scenario and the recent changes in global and regional climate, mainly due to global warming across the world, a huge amount of land area comes under the flood zones each and every year. A huge population is affected all over the globe who meet almost the same kind of circumstances. Taking into account the recent analyses and surveys, 21 million people worldwide are affected by river floods each year on average. Each year, floods, to greater or lesser degree, affect about 7.5 million hectares in India, a little over two per cent of the country's surface area. What's more, over five times this area is considered prone to floods, caused when rivers breach their banks. Considering the severity of the calamity, it is high time that efficient prediction be prepared in order to minimize the risks and losses of life and property. In the era of methodical prediction models of machine learning, these models should be considered for practical implications which would be a great breakthrough in the sector of disaster management. In order to have a comprehensive and accurate prediction of flood risk is essential to perform a selective and multivariate analyses among the different types of inputs which would include previous data of floods in the region to be taken into consideration. Climate change is a great determinant factor in the modification of the dynamic of water surface bodies.
## FACTORS CAUSING FLOOD
### 1)	RAINFALL
The most common cause of flooding is rainfall. Flooding occurs in known floodplains when prolonged rainfall occurs over several days or when intense rainfall occurs over a relatively short period of time. Severe thunderstorms are often the causes of heavy rainfall which lead to flood-like situations. So, rainfall would be one of the key factors in predicting floods. While considering rainfall as a factor, we could well determine the situation from the magnitude of rainfall in the region of consideration.

### 2)	CATCHMENT AREA
Along with rainfall, the terrain and water-absorbing capacity of the catchment area is also an essential factor to be taken into    consideration. The soil in the catchment area should be of high water-holding capacity. Soil water holding capacity is controlled primarily by the soil texture and the soil organic matter content. Soil texture is a reflection of the particle size distribution of a soil. In general, the higher the percentage of silt and clay sized particles, the higher the water holding capacity.
Moreover, the terrain in and around the catchment area also plays an important role in determining the extent of rainfall in the area. Generally, the regions of hilly terrains are the areas which receive more rainfall in comparison to the plain ones. This is because the hilly regions block the clouds from further flowing and as a result, a high percentage of rainfall occurs at the hills and their slopes. This water then flows to the foothills of the terrains which generates a possibility of flood like condition in the region.
### 3)	WATER BASIN LEVELS
The level or capacity of the river also is a major factor. Due to human interference in the flowing of rivers such as building of dams, decrease in river width due to massive constructions and filling of river bed in order to acquire more and more land, etc., the stress on river beds increases as a lower volume or space is available for the rivers to drain the extra volume of water.
### 4)	RESERVOIRS
Reservoirs are artificially created lakes that are usually formed by building a dam, across a river. Recent floods like the floods in Kerala imply that the failure of reservoirs also have a great hand in causing flash flooding in the regions that follow the reservoir. The weakening of dams and over-filling of the reservoirs can result in either breaking of the dam or overflow of extra water into the adjoining land area. Many dams are built for the purpose of flood protection, to attenuate flow and its impacts downstream. The inflow and outflow of water from a reservoir are determined by an operating schedule or rule curve, which maintains a flood cushion in expectation of inflows expected to fill the reservoir. Rule curve revision may be required periodically, but changing weather patterns is rarely the reason for it. More often, rule curve revision is required due to changed priorities and reduced carrying capacity of the downstream channel.
### 5)	STORM SURGE
In many cases, due to the development of deep depressions or low pressure regions, the sea breeze or the wind from the high pressure area of seas rushes towards the low pressure regions and brings moist air which later forms clouds and precipitates causing heavy rainfall across the low pressure region. This rainfall generally has much greater magnitude in comparison to normal rainfall. Such heavy rainfall can also end up in flood like situations if the catchment area would be unable to absorb the amount the water that would precipitate. 
## The case of Kerala floods
Beginning on 15 August 2018, severe floods affected the south Indian state of Kerala, due to unusually high rainfall (about 256% more than usual) during the monsoon season. The death toll increased to a staggering 483 with 15 people missing. Though most of the damage was done by the rainfall, the opening up of majority of dams also worsened the situation. Six out of the seven major reservoirs were about ninety percent of their capacity before extreme rainfall. When the extreme rainfall took place, about three reservoirs were almost filled and overflow of water started.
## PREDICTION OF FLOODS
### •	Procedure
### **The problem of learning through machine learning has three main phases:**
### -> The training phase, where the model of learning is built using labelled data;
### -> The testing phase, where the model is tested labelled data;
### -> The deployment phase, where the model is used to predict the class of unlabelled data.
The three phases are carried out in sequence and iteratively in an ML implementation. The basis of a ML implementation is completely based on a combination of representation, evaluation, optimization. Therefore, one requires a classifier which would make up the hypothesis of the learner. Then, an evaluation function or cost function would be made up. Actually, this cost function would be made up internally by the algorithm one would use. The choice of optimization technique is the key to improve the efficiency of the learner, and helps determine the classifier produced if the evaluation function has more than one optimum.
### •	Feature Set
The feature vector for different regions will be different as the conditions for each region will not be similar. For instance, one will have to consider the reservoirs in case of the presence of any reservoir in the region. In general, the feature vector is composed of set of climatic variables particularly discharge along the river bed, temperature and extent of precipitation, volume of water stored and the river flow. The outputs are the flood prediction risk considered as a boolean variable problem and the flood return period Tm. In its simplest form, the binary classification reduces to: given a pattern x drawn from a domain X, estimate which value an associated binary random variable y will assume. The output set has been evaluated applying an SVM algorithm. Machine Learning techniques provide a feasible example of algorithms that could easily predict extreme events by using multivariate datasets. The project will explore particularly the use of the algorithms Support Vector Machines. SVM can represent a potential alternative which relieves the user from a time-consuming trial and error procedure of synthesizing the suitable network architecture without compromising on the prediction accuracy.
### •	Satellite Data and Surface Remote Sensors
Satellite multisensory data also can be used to investigate the evolution of water bodies and water balance, particularly the hydrological water balance model using satellite land surface temperature images. The strength of remote sensing techniques lies in the possibility to provide both spatial and temporal views of surface water quality parameters that is typically not possible from in situ measurements. Besides water quality evaluation, remote sensing enables us to investigate land cover dynamics and evolution; depending on the extent of target areas, a wide variety of satellite instruments, mostly coming from spatial medium resolution sensors.
### •	Support Vector Machines
In machine learning, support vector machines (SVMs, also support vector networks) are supervised learning models with associated learning algorithms that analyse data used for classification and regression analysis. Support vector machine (SVM) is a supervised machine learning algorithm that can be used for both classification and regression challenges. In SVM, the data points are plot in an N-dimensional space where N is the number of features and find a hyper-plane to differentiate the datapoints. SVMs understanding can start from this simple concept: a simple way to classify a set of points in a plan is to draw a line and call points lying on one side positive and on the other side negative. If the two sets are well separated, one would intuitively draw the separating line such that it is as far as possible away from the points in both sets.
### •	Principles to be Used
Considering the multivariate nature of flood prediction, the flood prediction is influenced by a number of factors such as land use, topology, hydrology and meteorological events. The model can be considered as an ML algorithm implemented based on equations of basic laws of physics, and in particular, based on the principles of conservation of mass, conservation of energy and conservation of momentum. The basic equation of the model will be:
### 	dV/dt = h.A + R(t) - A.v(t) - k.a.v’(t)
        1      2     3       4         5
where V: volume of water stored in the reservoir;

	    A    : area of reservoir/ catchment area
      
	    a     : cross-sectional area of the water flowing through river bed
      
	    h    : height of rainfall upon unit area per second upon the region
	    
      R(t): extra volume of water that is coming from upstream
	    
      v(t): speed of water overflowing in case of filling of the region
      
      v’(t): speed of water flowing along the river bed downstream

Actually, we are conserving the volume of water in the reservoir. The term 1 represents the rate of change of volume of water in the reservoir. The term 2 represents the amount of rainfall received upon the region. The third term represents the amount of water that is coming from upstream. This could be due to cloud bursts, snow melting and/or heavy rainfall due to hilly terrains at the upper area of the catchment region. The fourth and fifth term consist of the total water that is being drained out of the  region either through the river bed or by overflowing to the adjoining land areas of the river.
This equation can be well used to predict the values of the fourth and fifth terms( as they are the ones to be predicted since if we predict the drainage from the catchment area, then only we can speculate whether the magnitudes can bring on flood like situation in the region or not). We will use the satellite, remote sensors and past years data to determine the values of the second and third term as they consist of the features that we are going to use. 

## Prevention of floods :
### 1. Protect wetlands and introduce plant trees strategically
The creation of more wetlands – which can act as sponges, soaking up moisture – and wooded areas can slow down waters when rivers overflow. Halting deforestation and wetland drainage, reforesting upstream areas and restoring damaged wetlands could significantly reduce the impact of climate change on flooding.
### 2. Restore rivers to their natural courses
Many river channels have been historically straightened to improve navigability. Remeandering straightened rivers by introducing their bends once more increases their length and can delay the flood flow and reduce the impact of the flooding downstream. 
### 3. Introduce water storage areas

Introducing water storage wells in the line of flow of the water coming out of the barrier can prove vital in stopping it from flooding the nearby occupied area as well as can work as a harvesting system for water to be used in situations of water scarcity.

### 4. Improve soil conditions
Inappropriate soil management, machinery and animal hooves can cause soil to become compacted so that instead of absorbing moisture, holding it and slowly letting it go, water runs off it immediately. Well drained soil can absorb huge quantities of rainwater, preventing it from running into rivers.
### 5. Put up more flood barriers

Self-activating flood barriers can be introduced to stop water from flowing to residential areas. These would work as an embankment to stop water flowing above a threshold value so that the civilization does not get affected and this would allow slow moving stream of water to enter the area where the water can be used for irrigation purposes.
